Relay: Design Document
agent-agent context passing, done right | v0.1 — May 2026


1.1 What is Relay?
Relay is a lightweight, open source middleware library for Python that solves one specific problem: making context pass reliably between AI agents in a multi-agent pipeline.
Every multi-agent system today is held together with brittle custom scripts. Developers manually serialize a conversation history, dump it into the next agent's prompt, and pray nothing breaks. When it does break, there is no audit trail, no rollback, and no way to know which agent introduced the corrupted data.
Relay replaces that guesswork with a thin, opinionated layer that handles context packaging, validation, snapshotting, and rollback automatically.


1.2 The problem in one sentence
One hallucinating agent silently corrupts the shared context, and every downstream agent inherits the damage.
The root cause is that existing orchestration tools treat the context window as a mutable blob with no version control. Relay treats it like a ledger: append-only, signed at every step, and reversible.


1.3 Architecture layers
Relay has five layers. Each one is independently testable and replaceable.
Layer
	Name
	Responsibility
	1
	Context broker
	Normalises, timestamps, and cryptographically signs the context envelope before any agent touches it.
	2
	Slice packager
	Cuts a minimal, read-only slice of context for each agent. Agents never see the full history.
	3
	Agent runner
	Executes the agent call. Framework-agnostic: works with any LLM provider or local model.
	4
	Handoff validator
	Runs between every handoff. Detects contradictions, diffs what changed, triggers rollback if needed.
	5
	Snapshot store
	Persists every clean checkpoint as immutable JSON. The rollback target.


1.4 The context envelope
Every time context moves between agents, it is wrapped in a signed envelope. The envelope is immutable after creation.
{
 "relay_version": "0.1.0",
 "pipeline_id": "uuid-v4",
 "step": 2,
 "timestamp": "2026-05-04T10:22:00Z",
 "token_budget_used": 1840,
 "token_budget_total": 8000,
 "payload": { ...agent output... },
 "signature": "sha256:abc123..."
}

The signature covers the full payload. If any downstream process tampers with the envelope, validation fails immediately and the pipeline rolls back to the last clean snapshot.


1.5 Rollback behaviour
The validator runs after every agent completes. If it flags an issue, Relay does not attempt to repair the output. It rolls back silently to the last persisted snapshot and either retries the step or surfaces an error to the caller, depending on the pipeline configuration.
This is the core design decision that separates Relay from a simple logging wrapper. Repair logic is speculative and usually makes things worse. Rollback is deterministic.


1.6 What Relay is not
* Not an agent framework. Relay does not manage prompts, personas, or tool use.
* Not an LLM router. Use LiteLLM, LangChain, or direct SDK calls for that.
* Not a full orchestration platform. Relay is the connective tissue, not the orchestrator.
* Not opinionated about agent design. Bring your own agents.


1.7 v0.1 scope
The first version ships exactly three things and nothing else:
* Context broker + envelope signing
* Handoff validator with hallucination check and diff inspector
* Snapshot store with rollback
Everything else, including token budget enforcement, multi-provider support, and async pipelines, is post-v0.1. Scope creep is the number one way side projects die.

===========V2===================
Relay: Design Document
agent-agent context passing, done right | v0.1 — May 2026


1.1 What is Relay?
Relay is a lightweight, open source middleware library for Python that solves one specific problem: making context pass reliably between AI agents in a multi-agent pipeline.
Every multi-agent system today is held together with brittle custom scripts. Developers manually serialize a conversation history, dump it into the next agent's prompt, and pray nothing breaks. When it does break, there is no audit trail, no rollback, and no way to know which agent introduced the corrupted data.
Relay replaces that guesswork with a thin, opinionated layer that handles context packaging, validation, snapshotting, and rollback automatically.


1.2 The problem in one sentence
One hallucinating agent silently corrupts the shared context, and every downstream agent inherits the damage.
The root cause is that existing orchestration tools treat the context window as a mutable blob with no version control. Relay treats it like a ledger: append-only, signed at every step, and reversible.


1.3 Architecture layers
Relay has five layers. Each one is independently testable and replaceable.

Layer 1 — Context broker
Normalises, timestamps, and cryptographically signs the context envelope before any agent touches it.

Layer 2 — Slice packager
Cuts a minimal, read-only slice of context for each agent. Agents never see the full history.

Layer 3 — Agent runner
Executes the agent call. Framework-agnostic: works with any LLM provider or local model.

Layer 4 — Handoff validator
Runs between every handoff. Detects contradictions, diffs what changed, triggers rollback if needed.

Layer 5 — Snapshot store
Persists every clean checkpoint as immutable JSON. The rollback target.


1.4 The context envelope
Every time context moves between agents, it is wrapped in a signed envelope. The envelope is immutable after creation.

{
 "relay_version": "0.1.0",
 "pipeline_id": "uuid-v4",
 "step": 2,
 "timestamp": "2026-05-04T10:22:00Z",
 "token_budget_used": 1840,
 "token_budget_total": 8000,
 "payload": { ...agent output... },
 "signature": "sha256:abc123..."
}

The signature covers the full payload. If any downstream process tampers with the envelope, validation fails immediately and the pipeline rolls back to the last clean snapshot.


1.5 Rollback behaviour
The validator runs after every agent completes. If it flags an issue, Relay does not attempt to repair the output. It rolls back silently to the last persisted snapshot and either retries the step or surfaces an error to the caller, depending on the pipeline configuration.
This is the core design decision that separates Relay from a simple logging wrapper. Repair logic is speculative and usually makes things worse. Rollback is deterministic.


1.6 What Relay is not
- Not an agent framework. Relay does not manage prompts, personas, or tool use.
- Not an LLM router. Use LiteLLM, LangChain, or direct SDK calls for that.
- Not a full orchestration platform. Relay is the connective tissue, not the orchestrator.
- Not opinionated about agent design. Bring your own agents.


1.7 v0.1 scope
The first version ships exactly three things and nothing else:
- Context broker + envelope signing
- Handoff validator with hallucination check and diff inspector
- Snapshot store with rollback

Everything else is post-v0.1. Scope creep is the number one way side projects die.


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
ROADMAP TO v1.0
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Target audience: AI agent framework builders — teams and individuals building their
own orchestration layers on top of LLMs, not end users of existing frameworks.
Monetisation: Fully open source. Growth through community adoption, integrations,
and reputation. No paid tier.


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
v0.2 — Token Budget Enforcement + Slice Packager v2
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Theme: Make the core loop airtight before expanding surface area.

2.1 Token budget enforcement (hard cap)
The envelope already carries token_budget_used and token_budget_total. v0.2 makes
these fields enforceable, not decorative.

Behaviour:
- Before any agent call, the slice packager calculates the projected token cost of
  the slice it is about to pass. If the projected cost would push token_budget_used
  over token_budget_total, the call is blocked. The agent never runs.
- The pipeline receives a BudgetExceededError with the current usage, the limit,
  and the step index where the cap was hit.
- No soft warnings. No overflow. The cap is a hard wall.

Why hard cap only:
Soft caps require the caller to decide what to do after the warning fires. That
decision logic ends up duplicated across every pipeline that uses Relay. A hard cap
keeps the contract simple: the budget is either respected or the pipeline stops.
Framework builders can wrap the BudgetExceededError with their own retry or
escalation logic if they need it.

Implementation notes:
- Token counting uses tiktoken by default (cl100k_base). Pluggable via a
  TokenCounter interface so framework builders can swap in provider-native counters.
- Budget is set per pipeline_id at initialisation. Individual steps cannot override
  the pipeline budget.
- token_budget_used in the envelope is updated atomically after each successful
  handoff validator pass, not after the agent call. This prevents a failed step from
  consuming budget.

2.2 Slice packager v2
The v0.1 slice packager does a naive recency cut — it takes the last N messages
that fit within a token limit. v0.2 makes it smarter.

New slicing strategies (selectable per pipeline):
- Recency (default, same as v0.1): last N messages by token count.
- Relevance: cosine similarity against the current step's task description. Requires
  an embedding model. Pluggable interface; no embedding model is bundled.
- Structural: honours explicit section markers in the context (e.g. [FACTS],
  [DECISIONS], [SCRATCHPAD]). Agents only receive the sections they declare they
  need in their manifest.

Agent manifest (new concept introduced in v0.2):
Each agent can declare a simple manifest at registration time:

{
  "agent_id": "summariser",
  "reads": ["FACTS", "DECISIONS"],
  "writes": ["SUMMARY"],
  "max_tokens": 2000
}

The slice packager uses the manifest to enforce read/write boundaries. An agent
that tries to write to a section it did not declare raises a HandoffValidationError.
This is the first step toward agents that are auditable by design.

Deliverables for v0.2:
- relay.budget.HardCapEnforcer
- relay.budget.TokenCounter (interface + tiktoken default impl)
- relay.slicer.SliceStrategy (enum: RECENCY, RELEVANCE, STRUCTURAL)
- relay.slicer.AgentManifest (dataclass + JSON schema)
- Updated envelope schema (manifest_hash field added to signature input)
- Full unit test coverage for budget enforcement edge cases


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
v0.3 — Agent Runner: Universal Adapter Layer
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Theme: Relay should work with whatever the framework builder is already using.
No lock-in.

3.1 The adapter interface
Every runner adapter implements one interface:

class AgentRunner(Protocol):
    async def run(self, slice: ContextSlice, manifest: AgentManifest) -> AgentOutput:
        ...

That is the entire contract. The runner receives a slice (not the full context) and
the agent's manifest. It returns a structured AgentOutput. Everything else —
prompt construction, retries, streaming — is the adapter's responsibility.

3.2 Bundled adapters (v0.3 ships all of these)

LangChain adapter:
- Wraps any LangChain Runnable or Chain.
- Converts ContextSlice to a LangChain-compatible message list.
- Captures LangChain callbacks and maps them to Relay's audit log format.

CrewAI adapter:
- Wraps a CrewAI Agent.
- Handles CrewAI's tool-use output format and normalises it into AgentOutput.
- CrewAI's memory is disabled by default when running under Relay (Relay owns
  memory; CrewAI's internal memory would create a second, untracked state).

AutoGen adapter:
- Wraps an AutoGen AssistantAgent or UserProxyAgent.
- AutoGen's conversation loop is single-stepped: Relay calls one turn at a time
  and captures the delta, not the full AutoGen history.

Raw SDK adapter (OpenAI / Anthropic / Gemini):
- Direct API calls with no framework in between.
- Accepts a callable that takes a list of messages and returns a string or dict.
- The simplest possible adapter; useful for framework builders who want full
  control and are using Relay purely for the context integrity layer.

Local model adapter (Ollama / vLLM):
- Targets the OpenAI-compatible REST interface that both Ollama and vLLM expose.
- Configurable base_url and model name.
- No streaming support in v0.3 (post-v0.3 item).

3.3 Adapter registry
Framework builders register adapters by name at pipeline initialisation:

pipeline = relay.Pipeline(
    steps=[
        relay.Step(agent=my_langchain_chain, runner="langchain"),
        relay.Step(agent=my_ollama_model, runner="local", base_url="http://localhost:11434"),
    ],
    budget=8000
)

Custom adapters can be registered by passing a class that implements AgentRunner.
Relay does not care where the class comes from.

3.4 AgentOutput schema
All adapters normalise their output to:

{
  "text": "...",
  "structured": { ...optional dict... },
  "tool_calls": [ ...optional list... ],
  "token_count": 412,
  "latency_ms": 1840,
  "adapter": "langchain"
}

The handoff validator runs on AgentOutput, not on the raw adapter response. This
is what makes the validator framework-agnostic.

Deliverables for v0.3:
- relay.runners.LangChainAdapter
- relay.runners.CrewAIAdapter
- relay.runners.AutoGenAdapter
- relay.runners.RawSDKAdapter
- relay.runners.LocalModelAdapter
- relay.runners.AgentRunner (Protocol)
- relay.runners.AgentOutput (dataclass + JSON schema)
- Integration test suite (one test per adapter against a mocked LLM endpoint)


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
v0.4 — Async Pipelines: Parallel Agent Execution
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Theme: Multiple agents working on the same context simultaneously, without
corrupting each other.

4.1 The parallel execution problem
In a sequential pipeline, context integrity is straightforward: one agent writes,
the validator checks, the snapshot is persisted, the next agent reads. In a
parallel pipeline, multiple agents read the same snapshot, produce independent
outputs, and those outputs must be merged back into a single envelope before the
next step. The merge is where corruption happens.

Relay's answer is the fork-join model.

4.2 Fork-join model
A pipeline step can be declared as a parallel step. When the runner hits a parallel
step, it:

1. Forks: creates N independent ContextSlice copies from the current snapshot,
   one per parallel agent. Each fork is stamped with a fork_id.

2. Runs: executes all N agents concurrently using asyncio.gather. Each agent
   writes only to its own fork. Forks are isolated; agents cannot see each other's
   in-progress output.

3. Joins: once all N agents complete (or any one fails), the join strategy merges
   the fork outputs back into a single envelope.

4.3 Join strategies
Three strategies ship in v0.4. Framework builders select one per parallel step.

UNION: Merge all fork outputs into the shared context. Sections written by
different agents are concatenated. Conflicts (two agents writing to the same
section with different values) raise a MergeConflictError and trigger rollback.

VOTE: Run the handoff validator against each fork output independently. Accept
the fork that passes validation with the highest confidence score. Discard the
rest. Useful when parallel agents are running the same task with different prompts
or models and you want the best output, not all outputs.

FIRST_WINS: Accept the first fork to complete and pass validation. Cancel the
remaining in-flight agent calls. Useful for latency-sensitive pipelines where
parallel agents are redundant by design (i.e., any one of them would do).

4.4 Failure handling in parallel steps
If one fork fails (agent error, budget exceeded, validation failure):
- Under UNION: the entire parallel step fails and rolls back to the pre-fork snapshot.
- Under VOTE: the failed fork is discarded. If all forks fail, the step fails.
- Under FIRST_WINS: the failed fork is discarded. The next completed fork wins.

4.5 Envelope changes for parallel steps
The envelope gains two new fields for parallel steps:

"fork_id": "uuid-v4",          // present only on fork envelopes
"join_strategy": "UNION",      // present only on the merged envelope
"fork_count": 3,               // how many forks were created
"forks_succeeded": 3           // how many passed validation

4.6 Concurrency model
Relay uses asyncio throughout. The AgentRunner protocol gains an async run method
in v0.4 (it is already async in the v0.3 spec above — this is intentional
forward compatibility). All bundled adapters ship async implementations in v0.4.
Synchronous adapters are wrapped automatically using asyncio.to_thread.

Deliverables for v0.4:
- relay.async_pipeline.ParallelStep (dataclass)
- relay.async_pipeline.ForkManager
- relay.async_pipeline.JoinStrategy (enum: UNION, VOTE, FIRST_WINS)
- relay.async_pipeline.MergeConflictError
- Async versions of all v0.3 adapters
- Parallel pipeline integration tests (mock LLM, real asyncio)
- Updated envelope JSON schema (fork fields)


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
v0.5 — Observability + Developer Tooling
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Theme: If framework builders cannot see what Relay is doing, they cannot debug
their pipelines or trust Relay in production. Observability is not a nice-to-have.

5.1 Structured audit log
Every event Relay produces — envelope created, slice cut, agent called, validator
passed/failed, snapshot persisted, rollback triggered — is emitted as a structured
log event:

{
  "event": "handoff_validator.failed",
  "pipeline_id": "uuid-v4",
  "step": 3,
  "fork_id": null,
  "reason": "contradiction_detected",
  "diff": { ...changed fields... },
  "rolled_back_to_step": 2,
  "ts": "2026-05-04T10:22:01Z"
}

Events are emitted via Python's standard logging module at the relay.audit logger.
Framework builders wire this to whatever sink they use (stdout, Datadog, Grafana
Loki, etc.). No proprietary sink is bundled.

5.2 OpenTelemetry traces
Every pipeline run produces an OTEL trace. Each step is a span. Parallel forks
are child spans of the parallel step span. Attributes on each span include step
index, agent_id, adapter name, token_budget_used, and validation result.

OTEL export is opt-in. If the otel extra is not installed, Relay skips trace
emission silently. No runtime dependency on opentelemetry for users who do not
want it.

pip install relay-context[otel]

5.3 CLI inspector
A command-line tool for inspecting snapshot stores during development.

relay inspect --pipeline <pipeline_id>
  Lists all snapshots for a pipeline with step index, timestamp, token usage,
  and validation result.

relay diff --pipeline <pipeline_id> --from 2 --to 3
  Shows the full diff between two snapshots: what changed, what was added,
  what was removed.

relay rollback --pipeline <pipeline_id> --to 2
  Manually rolls back a pipeline to a specific snapshot. Useful during
  development when a pipeline is stuck in a bad state.

The CLI reads from the same snapshot store the library writes to. No separate
server or daemon required.

5.4 Pytest plugin
relay-pytest is a companion package that makes testing pipelines straightforward.

- relay_pipeline fixture: spins up an isolated in-memory pipeline for each test.
- assert_clean_handoff(step): asserts that a specific step passed validation.
- assert_rolled_back(step): asserts that a rollback was triggered at a specific step.
- snapshot_at(step): returns the snapshot at a specific step for assertion.

Deliverables for v0.5:
- relay.audit (structured log emitter)
- relay.otel (optional OTEL integration, gated behind extra)
- relay CLI (relay inspect, relay diff, relay rollback)
- relay-pytest (companion pytest plugin, separate PyPI package)


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
v0.6 — Snapshot Store Backends
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Theme: The v0.1 snapshot store writes to local disk (JSON files). Production
pipelines need more options.

6.1 Backend interface
All snapshot backends implement:

class SnapshotStore(Protocol):
    def save(self, envelope: Envelope) -> None: ...
    def load(self, pipeline_id: str, step: int) -> Envelope: ...
    def list(self, pipeline_id: str) -> list[SnapshotMeta]: ...
    def delete(self, pipeline_id: str, step: int) -> None: ...

6.2 Bundled backends (v0.6)
- LocalFileStore (default, ships in v0.1): JSON files in a configurable directory.
- RedisStore: Uses Redis HSET. Snapshots expire after a configurable TTL.
- PostgresStore: Stores envelopes as JSONB in a single relay_snapshots table.
  Schema is managed by Relay; no migrations required from the user.
- S3Store: Writes envelopes as gzipped JSON objects. Bucket and prefix are
  configurable. Useful for long-running or high-volume pipelines.

All backends are installed as optional extras:
pip install relay-context[redis]
pip install relay-context[postgres]
pip install relay-context[s3]

Deliverables for v0.6:
- relay.stores.SnapshotStore (Protocol)
- relay.stores.LocalFileStore (refactored from v0.1 impl)
- relay.stores.RedisStore
- relay.stores.PostgresStore
- relay.stores.S3Store
- Integration tests for each backend (using testcontainers)


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
v1.0 — Production Release
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

Theme: Stable API, hardened security, complete documentation, ecosystem-ready.

7.1 API stability guarantee
From v1.0, the public API is stable. Breaking changes require a major version bump.
The public API surface is defined explicitly in relay/__init__.py. Anything not
exported from that file is considered internal and may change without notice.

7.2 Security hardening
Envelope signing (SHA-256 HMAC, introduced in v0.1) is audited and tightened:
- Signing key rotation: pipelines can rotate their signing key mid-run. Old
  envelopes remain verifiable using a key history log.
- Replay attack prevention: each envelope includes a monotonically increasing
  nonce per pipeline. An envelope with a lower nonce than the last accepted
  envelope is rejected.
- Constant-time signature comparison: prevent timing attacks on signature
  validation.

7.3 Documentation
- API reference (auto-generated from docstrings via pdoc).
- Architecture guide: explains all five layers, the envelope schema, and the
  rollback model in depth. Written for framework builders, not end users.
- Integration guides: one per bundled adapter (LangChain, CrewAI, AutoGen,
  Raw SDK, Local models).
- Snapshot store migration guide: how to move from LocalFileStore to Redis,
  Postgres, or S3 without losing existing snapshots.
- Async pipeline guide: fork-join model, join strategies, failure handling.

7.4 Performance baseline
Before v1.0 ships, Relay must pass a performance baseline test:
- A 10-step sequential pipeline with 8,000 token budget completes the Relay
  overhead (excluding LLM call time) in under 50ms per step on commodity hardware.
- A 5-fork parallel pipeline merges and validates in under 100ms (excluding LLM
  call time).

These numbers are not aspirational. They are gates. If Relay cannot hit them,
the release is blocked until it can.

7.5 What is explicitly out of scope for v1.0
The following are non-goals and will not be added before v1.0 regardless of
community requests:
- A UI or dashboard.
- Prompt management or template rendering.
- Agent memory beyond what the snapshot store already provides.
- Built-in retry logic beyond rollback. Callers handle retries.
- Any paid or hosted service.

These can be built on top of Relay by framework builders. They are not Relay's job.


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
APPENDIX A — Release Summary
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

v0.1  Context broker, handoff validator, snapshot store (local file)
v0.2  Hard-cap token budget enforcement, slice packager v2, agent manifests
v0.3  Universal adapter layer (LangChain, CrewAI, AutoGen, Raw SDK, Local)
v0.4  Async pipelines, parallel agent execution, fork-join model
v0.5  Structured audit log, OpenTelemetry traces, CLI inspector, pytest plugin
v0.6  Pluggable snapshot store backends (Redis, Postgres, S3)
v1.0  Stable API, security hardening, full documentation, performance gates


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
APPENDIX B — Design Principles (apply to all versions)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

1. One job. Relay moves context between agents safely. It does not do anything else.

2. Determinism over cleverness. Rollback beats repair. Hard caps beat warnings.
   Explicit beats inferred.

3. Bring your own everything. No LLM provider, embedding model, agent framework,
   or storage backend is required. Every dependency is either optional or pluggable.

4. Testability is a feature. Every layer is independently testable. The pytest
   plugin ships alongside the library, not as an afterthought.

5. Framework builders are the user. The API surface is designed for people building
   abstractions on top of Relay, not for end users calling agents directly. This
   means the API is explicit, composable, and low-level enough to be useful.
